---
layout: drawpile_help
title: "Enabling Crash Dumps"
description: "How to enable debug dumps if Drawpile crashes."
date: 2024-07-28 00:00:00 +0200
category: "help"
tag: help tech
---

Crash dumps can help figure out why Drawpile crashed. They are files that get created if the program crashes and let a developer take a look at where things went wrong. They help a lot in fixing bugs, so enabling them and sending them in is greatly appreciated.

If you want to send these files to a developer, take a look at [the main help page](https://drawpile.net/help/){:target="_blank"} for how to get in contact.

Note that you have to enable crash dumps in advance. Any information about crashes that happened before that are lost to time.

## Windows

You can use the following registry scripts to enable and disable crash report generation. Download these files (there's a download button at the top-right), then double-click on them to execute them.

* [EnableCrashDumps.reg](https://github.com/drawpile/Drawpile/blob/main/pkg/windows/EnableCrashDumps.reg) to enable crash dumps.
* [DisableCrashDumps.reg](https://github.com/drawpile/Drawpile/blob/main/pkg/windows/DisableCrashDumps.reg) to disable them again.

After you enabled them and Drawpile crashes, a dump file will be created. To locate it, open the file explorer and type `%LOCALAPPDATA%` into the bar at the top and hit the enter key. Then locate the CrashDumps folder and open it. Inside, there should be crash dump files, the ones pertaining to Drawpile should contain `drawpile` in their name somewhere.

If you want more details on how this works or want to customize the way these dumps are created, you can read [Microsoft's documentation on the matter](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/win32/wer/collecting-user-mode-dumps){:target="_blank"}.

## Linux

On Linux, core dumps are usually generated by default and should go into `/var/lib/systemd/coredump`.

## Other Operating Systems

If you know how to accomplish this on macOS, Android or the browser, feel free to [contribute it](https://docs.drawpile.net/help/development/contributing)!
